Berlin is an extremely safe city, however like all cities Berlin has its share of petty crime. Just use common sense when at these places, or in crowded touristy areas.  Don't keep large amounts of cash on hand at a time, don't wear flashy and expensive jewelry, and keep your passport in a safe place, ideally a money belt underneath your clothes where you can hide it.  Keep alert while on the S/U-Bahn: better to be too cautious than sorry!  On each U-Bahn station platform, there is a red panic button that can be pushed if need be.  Guards also patrol most stations.   While at restaurants or cafes, don't keep a purse slung on the back of a chair where someone can easily snatch it.  Keep it under the table instead.  NEVER leave luggage unattended anywhere.  Just use common sense and keep your judgment up, Berlin is very safe and more likely than not, you won't ever be the victim of any type of crime.

Two of the biggest areas for pickpocketing in Berlin are on the U-Bahn and at the Bahnhof Zoo. Wherever you encounter them, you may find that they are not the stereotypical pickpockets.  They are young, barely past their teens or still in their teens, and usually work in teams of two, with more in hiding nearby.  Often they will masquerade as deaf mutes who are 'raising money' for their cause with more government assistance and / or recognition of their handicap.  Consequently, their hands are always flying, shoving paper at you, asking you to sign, hands making some gestures, all as a distraction to you.  They will ALWAYS ask for a 'small' donation.

As soon as you have your wallet out and open, they will shove the paper at you again, hands flying, and will put the paper on top of your open wallet.  As you're looking at them trying to figure out what they're saying or what they want, the other one will slip under the paper and quickly and unnoticed, will remove the money from your wallet.  You never know what's happening.  Fortunately, they rarely take the entire wallet or credit cards, just cash...all of it!!

Sometimes one will be playing an instrument and asking for money, while his/her partner is 'collecting.'  They are everywhere...major avenues, shopping centers, parks.  They will always run if you start to photograph them.  So...remember...if ANYONE shoves paper at you wanting you to sign, shoo them away.  DO NOT, UNDER ANY CIRCUMSTANCES, REMOVE YOUR WALLET FROM ITS SECURE LOCATION!!!